<!--- Timestamp to trigger book rebuilds: 2024-01-19 10:09:55.807115 --->



## September 2022

<small>Source: <code>2022-06-06.Rmd</code></small>

### The BIC

I was wondering about the so-called Bayesian information criterion (BIC)
today. What's the deal with it? Both the AIC and BIC have the form:

$$\text{penalty}\times k\ \text{parameters} - 2\times \text{model log-likelihood}$$

For the AIC, the penalty is 2, and for the BIC, the penalty is $\ln(n\
\text{observations})$. If we note that `ln(20)` = 2.996 (the penalty
for 20 observations), then the BIC penalty is always larger than the AIC
penalty in practice.

[See](https://www.jstor.org/stable/43495189) Aho, Derryberry, & Peterson
(2014): The AIC prioritizes out-of-sample prediction (asymptotic
efficiency). BIC is an approximation of a Bayesian hypothesis test (so,
asymptotic consistency). They note that the BIC is ideal when "(1) only
a few potential hypotheses are considered and (2) one of the hypotheses
is (essentially) correct," and the AIC worldview is for when there are
"(1) numerous hypotheses and (2) the conviction that all of them are to
differing degrees wrong."

## June 2022

<small>Source: <code>2022-06-06.Rmd</code></small>

### Getting [downlit](https://downlit.r-lib.org/index.html) to work on this notebook

notestar, which I use to create this notebook, produces an HTML file. I
can then post-process this HTML file using
`downlit::downlit_html_path()` so that R function calls are
automatically linked to documentation pages. This feature is great, but
out of the box, it ignores the syntax highlighting of the output
document. The solution, it turns out, is buried in
`?rmarkdown::html_document` (look at how nicely that is autolinked). I
make sure that the following css file is included in the build process,
so that links are underlined and the style defers to the default syntax
highlighting coloring.


```css
code a:any-link {
 color: inherit; /* use colour from syntax highlighting */
 text-decoration: underline;
 text-decoration-color: #ccc;
}
```


### Windows Terminal settings for Miniconda

Here is how to add the Miniconda prompt to Windows Terminal. Analogous
steps probably will work for an Anaconda prompt.

First, we need to know where the Miniconda prompt lives. 

  - Find the desired Anaconda/Miniconda prompt in the Start Menu. Right
    click \> Open file location
    
  - Select the shortcut for the Anaconda/Miniconda prompt. Right click \> Properties.
  
Look at the target field. For my Miniconda shortcut, I have:

```
%windir%\System32\cmd.exe "/K" C:\Users\trist\miniconda3\Scripts\activate.bat C:\Users\trist\miniconda3
```

We don't need to hardcode in my user profile path. I also don't think
that last path is necessary, so this can simplify to:

```
%windir%\System32\cmd.exe /K %USERPROFILE%\miniconda3\Scripts\activate.bat
```

In Windows Terminal, create a terminal profile:

  - open Settings \> Add a new profile \> New empty profile.
    
#### Interactive setup

We can use the Windows Terminal app to set up the miniconda prompt.
Things to change include:

  - Name
  - Command line: Use the target field from above. In my case, I paste
    in `%windir%\System32\cmd.exe /K
    %USERPROFILE%\miniconda3\Scripts\activate.bat`
  - Starting directory: I select "Use parent process directory".
  - Icon: I use the snake emoji ðŸ but [this
    page](https://dev.to/azure/easily-add-anaconda-prompt-in-windows-terminal-to-make-life-better-3p6j)
    has a hint about using a .ico file.

#### JSON

Instead of the interactive setup, we can open the JSON settings file
(Settings \> Open JSON file) and modify/paste in the settings. Here are
my settings. Here the `guid` field was created by Windows Terminal so we should
use the one it provides for us.


```json
{
  "commandline": "%windir%\\System32\\cmd.exe /K %USERPROFILE%\\miniconda3\\Scripts\\activate.bat",
  "guid": "{2679ff34-f6b9-5fcd-9b81-08b50df61bae}",
  "icon": "\ud83d\udc0d",
  "name": "Miniconda",
  "startingDirectory": null
}
```
